Gregg Braden possesses a rare combination
of scientific acumen and a vast knowledge
of ancient spiritual text.
While researching his latest book, The God Code,
he discovered that we are at a time in history
where the easy lessons are passed
and the time has come to dig deep
and learn the big lessons now.
He has also learned that there is a code
embedded in ourselves that links all of us.
He says this knowledge is a beginning
in bridging the difficulties that separate us
as individuals and cultures.
(gentle music)
In the last five years, I've had the opportunity
through my work, been on every continent
of the Earth with the exception of Antarctica.
While I have not been in every country,
I've spoken with people from the tribes
and the cultures and the traditions.
And what I can say is almost universally there
is a sense that we have entered into a time
very unique unlike any other time that anyone remembers
in the writings or in the history.
It's characterized a number of different ways.
More often than not, people say they feel like
something began and it has yet to complete
or they're waiting for the other foot to fall,
the other shoe to drop, is the way they feel.
It's bigger than 9/11, it's bigger than the war in Iraq.
Those may perhaps be symptoms of something
but they sense a low-level anxiety,
a tension if you will,
that something big is about to happen.
Although we may not know it consciously that we are
in some ways preparing for whatever that is.
How are you perceiving
what that thing is at this time?
Well, from my perspective, I've spent the bulk
of my adult life studying and researching
ancient text traditions, cultures, the wisdom
of those who have come before us, and they do in fact,
the texts, some of the calendars going back
over 18,000 years, that's before the last Ice Age,
all point to this time in history.
They say that we are living a very unique time.
In the words that they left for us,
they describe the time as a time of great change
and we've all heard about the prophecies that all converge
in this moment in history and that doesn't mean a lot
to someone in the West because we tend to discount those.
Well as a scientist what I can tell you,
as a former Earth scientist is that we are seeing
measurable perimeters that are changing
and appear to be converging.
For example, the magnetic fields of the Earth
are in rapid decline right now.
They reached the peak about 2,000 years ago.
They have declined consistently,
never looked back, since then.
We are now at the lowest magnetic point
in global magnetics than we've been in the last 2,000 years.
What exactly does that mean
for us as a species?
What it means in the geologic record
we can see this has happened at least 14 times
in the last 4 1/2 million years.
It generally in the past has been the precursor
to what scientists call a reversal or a flip
in the magnetic fields of the Earth.
Not the Earth physically,
rather the energetic sense, the field itself,
and it's got to be a really weird day,
the day that this happens.
People obviously have lived through it before,
the Hopi have talked about it in their traditions.
Biblical traditions talk about this and Egyptian traditions.
What we know is that the magnetic fields
in our bodies are very closely related,
that a change in the magnetic fields of the Earth
affect our dream states, people are talking
about having very, very intense, very vivid dreams.
Sleep patterns, time and space, people feel
that time is speeding up and there's a very good,
excuse me, a very good, excuse me.
Just pick it up from there.
There's a very good scientific reason
why we perceive that speeding up of time.
So there are very--
Can you explain that?
Because you know.
There are very real measurable perimeters that coincide
with what the ancient text and traditions say.
So in addition to the magnetics dropping,
there's a second perimeter
the Ancients call the heartbeat of the Earth.
Scientists first measured this directly 1899,
that's a fundamental pulse
of about 7.8 cycles or Hertz
per second so it's just a constant pulse.
We believed that it was so constant it would never change.
We built communication systems,
we built military weaponry based on this pulse
all up through the 1940s, 50s, 60s.
So 1980s, 1990s, that pulse began to increase
and what we know is that our bodies, ourselves,
are tuned to this fundamental pulse of our Mother Earth
as the Ancients said and that our metabolism, our bodies,
ours rhythms, our cycles will try to match
the pulse of the Earth.
So as that pulse increases, to us it seems as though
time is speeding up because we're trying to keep pace
with that fundamental heartbeat.
So we have these two perimeters,
this pulse that's increasing, magnetics that are decreasing,
and from a geologic record, it appears that when those two
perimeters converge, that that is a time
the Ancients called the great shift of the ages
or the shift between the worlds.
Native traditions say we've lived in,
we're in the fourth of four previous worlds
and when this world ends, we begin the fifth world.
Mayan calendars go back over 18,000 years.
They stop in the year 2012.
They say beyond 2012, it will make no sense to track time
the way you've track time in the past
because time will mean something very different to you.
Egyptian calendars going back over 40,000 years
say the Earth is going through a great change right now.
So the answer to your question, there are,
there are reasons in the cultural history
that point to this period in time.
Scientists now can measure perimeters that are changing
and they know that's happening.
The question is what does it mean?
So Western science is saying
"We're seeing these things happen.
"We don't know what it means."
The Ancients are saying "This is what it means and this
"is the opportunity for us to become better people."
Because we go through this change, it will push us
to the very edge of who we believe we are.
It'll push the limits of our sensibilities, it will test us
as a civilization and as a family
like we've never been tested before.
We will learn that we need one another
and that is why they are pleading with us,
the indigenous cultures, to remember our relationship
to the Earth, to care for the Earth,
to care for one another so that we can care for ourselves.
If I understand the wisdom and the traditions correctly,
it's the very act or living our lives
in the presence of one another,
of loving fully, intentionally, completely
and being present and being focused,
being the best that we can be
by living life day in and day out.
If we do that, by virtue of doing that,
we have prepared in the only way that we really can
for this time in history and here's the reason why.
You gonna ask me the reason why? (laughs)
Tell me the reason why.
Here's the reason why.
It's because, what scientists now tell us
is that for every emotion, every feeling
we have in our bodies, there's a chemistry that matches.
So we literally have life-affirming
or life-denying chemistries, hate chemistry,
or love chemistry so that the anger, rage,
and hate that we feel actually produces
a chemistry that, it steals the life from our bodies.
As we all intuitively know love, wisdom,
compassion, understanding, tolerance,
forgiveness imbues life into our bodies.
In the process of life as we're going through
these great tests, what we're actually doing
is preparing ourselves in the only way
that we would know how by living life.
I think anyone you talk to anywhere in the world
will say "Man, something has happened.
"My relationships are harder
"than they've ever been before."
Job careers, challenges within themselves,
their health, everyone, it's almost like
all the fluffy easy lessons are gone
and whatever we're going through right now,
it's the big stuff, the core issues that really,
although they may have been healed in the past,
they're asking for a greater healing.
By virtue of that, they are preparing us,
training us if you will, so that we may better
accommodate the changes in the world around us
although we may not know that on a conscious level.
So if you were speaking directly
to a 20-something disenfranchised individual
who's cruising the net and they stumble upon you,
they're looking for something,
they're not feeling part of anything,
what can you say that really prompts them
to think and care and do or be something
that makes a difference in the larger scale
or even to themselves, what would you say to one--
Well I don't know that anyone could be prompted to care.
Because that is an internal initiative.
What I would say to them first,
"If you're feeling disenfranchised,
"if you're feeling disconnected and out of sorts,
"that is perfectly normal and what I would expect
"for this time in history."
People feel like their world's been,
been turned upside down.
What science now is telling us and this ties into
some of the work that we talked about earlier,
Western science between 1993 and the year 2000,
under laboratory conditions,
established the fact and it is now a fact
that we are all connected through a field of energy.
We're bathed in the field of energy.
That is the mirror, literally it provides the mirror
of the world around us for what we have become from within.
So if we find ourselves in this society
that appears hateful or families that are non-supportive
and judgmental, that world around us is nothing more,
nothing less than what we as individuals
and collectively have become.
If we want to change this world,
we must become, and this is the key,
the ancient wisdom, we must become
the very things that we choose to experience in life.
If we choose love and compassion, nurturing,
we've got to become those things.
I've had people say to me "How can I become those
"if I don't experience it?"
That's the great workshop of life.
You must choose to become and demonstrate
and live in the world the very things
that you'd like to experience yourself.
In that way from within you open the door
to the laws of the physics of this world
that we're only beginning to understand,
to give that back to you.
So that I think is perhaps one of the greatest challenges.
But those young individuals, I mean everyone's feeling it.
There are, there is a generation that is feeling
displaced or disenfranchised because the world
that they're seeing makes little sense to them.
The answers they're receiving aren't the answers
that meet their needs.
So in their questioning, they're going after
in their own way, seeking their own answers.
This is, I made reference to this in the talk earlier today.
I had a 12-year old boy that came up to me
in the midst of a program during one of the breaks,
and he handed me a piece of paper
and we just spoken about the breakdown
of the peace process in the Middle East
and the buildup of arms and weapons
and the fact that one-half of the world's nations
are at war right now.
And this piece of paper, he printed it.
He says "If you can't create the peace,
"if you can't find the peace in your time."
He said "Stop the war long enough to give us a chance."
He didn't say "Stop the wars."
He said "The war."
Their sense is and so many young people feel
that it's over anyway.
There's a sense of hopelessness.
That we might as well live our lives
and do whatever we want to do now recklessly
because it's all over.
I hear that from people and I can understand
why they would feel that because this is such a unique time
in our history on the one hand.
On the other hand, it's the time where our world
and the people that will need us the most
because the time where we must remember,
the things that are important come together
as a family, care for one another.
Even people who are difficult to care for
and remember that there's a single field
out there of consciousness.
There is no them and us, there is a we.
We're part of everything, we're part of every government
that's ever been in power,
we're part of every atrocity that's ever happened,
we're part of all the beautiful life and the inventions
and all the good things.
It's all part of that same field
by virtue of this understanding.
Would you say it's,
as a species it was necessary for us to become
so disenfranchised and in disease to get to a point
where we even understood the need for
this paradigm shift as it were?
Your question is as a species,
is there a need for us to be at this point.
I believe that there is no need
and I think it's a fascinating choice.
I've spent a lot of time with indigenous peoples
from throughout the Earth.
Although they use different language,
they all say something very similar.
They say that there was a time
when we lived our lives very differently
in this world, remembered who we were
and we lived much closer to the Earth.
Not in the primitive state necessarily,
we just honored life and one another.
Something happened and they're not clear
on what it was that happened
and we began to forget.
In our forgetting, we so long for the connection
to the divine, to the feminine,
to the masculine, to the Earth,
to one another, to something greater.
We so long to have that once again.
So we embarked on a path of external technology
in an attempt to remind ourselves
of who we are from within.
As an engineer and I've worked
in engineering a good portion of my adult life,
so amazing technology from Star Wars to the fence,
to, you know,
projects that are so far beyond
where we think technology is today.
And as advanced as all those things are,
I can say I've never seen a piece of technology
that humans have built that does not mimic
something that we already are from within.
What we know, Western science will tell us
that every cell in our body has about 1.17 volts
of electrical potential.
So you take 50 trillion cells times 1.17 volts
and there's a lot of potential, lot of juice there.
Every cell is a capacitor, it transmits, it receives,
stores information, all the things our technology do.
What my indigenous friends and what the Ancients
say to us is we will continue to build
a very complex world of greater and greater complexity
out there is the world around us,
until we remember that we are those things
and then we no longer need those because we become,
we become the very things that we've built.
In that way we find our way back.
So it's interesting that it asks the question
when we see civilizations of our past,
that we think are primitive because they don't have a VCR
or a toaster for example.
Were they really primitive or were they so advanced
that they didn't have the need
for the kinds of things that we have today?
It's a question that's being taken seriously
by a lot of archaeologists, anthropologists today.
So as we find our way, it's an interesting path.
Because what has happened is when we were lost,
some of us chose this path of external technology
and now we've pushed it about as far as we can
and to survive now we've got to come back
and bring in the other portion, the internal technology,
the wisdom of our relationship,
the power of human emotion
and the role that it plays in the physics of our world,
it is perhaps as the Ancients said,
the single most powerful force in the universe.
Human emotion focused is very specific modalities of prayer.
Western physicists are only beginning to understand this.
They thought we were observers and now they're saying
"We're not observers, we by the act of being here,
"we are participating, we're creating the world
"that we're seeing right now."
There's a school of physics now that suggests
that the universe in fact is here and exists
because we're looking.
And what they found is that every place
human consciousness seeks or peers
to see and investigate what's there,
the act of looking is an internal process
and consciousness will place something
there for us to see.
They say we'll never find the end of the universe.
We'll never find it because every place we look,
consciousness as the creator, will put something there.
It is these kinds of understandings
that are bringing science and physics back full circle.
To tie in this outer and this inner technology
saying you know, maybe we have something to say
and something to do about the peace in our world
and the healing in our bodies.
Maybe it's not just a random process.
That's where the power of our inner technology begins.
You wrote a book called The Isaiah Effect,
speaking about the collective consciousness
when focused properly through the emotions,
the amount that can be accomplished
with really a relatively few, small number of people.
Can you just encapsulate that very briefly for people?
Sure, the investigations,
well first of all these are not new ideas.
The idea that we are connected through a field of energy
has been around forever, thousands of years.
What's new is the scientific validation of the field.
And scientists now coming to terms,
"Okay the field's there, what do we do with it?
"How connected are we really to this field?"
It led to a series of experiments back in 1970s
and the TM people, Transcendental Meditation,
university backed and funded and pulled in
some very good scientists to do some of these fields.
What they found was they had 24 cities
in the United States with populations over 10,000 people
and they did experiments.
Scientifically governed experiments.
They would take a certain number of people
and ask them to feel the feeling of peace, for example,
not to think the thought but rather to feel the feeling
in their bodies for certain periods of time.
What they found was during those periods of time,
statistically the communities around them changed.
Crimes against people declined, violent crimes.
Emergency hospital room visits declined,
traffic accidents declined.
In cities where the stock market was,
the stock market soared when this was happening.
When the people stopped feeling the peace,
all those statistics reversed.
This led to a greater experiment.
It was called the International Peace Project
in the Middle East, it was during the Lebanese war
with Israel in the early 1980s.
They had people that were strategically placed
in the war zones and during the window of time,
it's called the prayer window,
when the people were feeling the peace in their bodies,
terrorist activities dropped to zero,
they completely stopped.
All the other things happened,
crimes against people, violent crimes,
emergency hospital room visits all declined.
And they tried these, just to make sure
it wasn't maybe the time of the month
or full moon cycles or holidays,
they tried them all different times,
double blind studies, statistically valid studies,
what they found was it takes a relatively few
number of people to jump start this experience
and consciousness and the number
is the square root of 1% which is a very small number.
So if you take a population, whether it's 10 people
or a million, and you take 1% of that in your calculator
and then you take the square root of that,
it'll tell you how many people that you need.
So in a city of one million people, for example,
it only takes about 100 or in a world of six billion people,
it only takes about 8,000 to jump start this effect.
Obviously the more people that participate,
the more accelerated the effect.
As empowering as the discovery of a message
within the cells of all life is,
what may be even more significant
is that the only way we could ever unravel the mystery
and decode a language in the DNA of life,
we haven't talked even about what this language is yet,
the only way we could do that is to cross
the artificial boundaries, the traditional boundaries,
that have kept us separate from our world
now for over 400 years.
Science is only about 400 years old.
When science came along, and I'm a scientist
and I support the scientific method,
and the best scientists will tell you
that our science is incomplete.
What science came along, it did,
was it came along and compartmentalized
and separated what is actually all unified together.
There is no physics and chemistry and biology
and geology out there.
There's a world, we call it nature.
To help us feel comfortable with the complexity of nature,
they compartmentalize it into sciences now
to such a degree that when a physicist studies physics,
we no longer know that that physics
has any relation to perhaps chemistry.
Or when I was working on this project,
the linguist told me no one, no one ever said
that language had anything to do with life
or that biology had anything to do with ancient texts.
It was only by crossing those traditional boundaries,
honoring the wisdom of our past, that we were able
to come to the understandings that we did.
What that understanding is, it's a research project
that I began as an engineer back in the late 1980s,
during the last years of the Cold War,
looking for a single principle of peace
that would include every human
on the face of the Earth, regardless of their beliefs
or their lifestyle or their heritage or their culture.
Something that was common to everyone
and it made sense in the 1980s,
this was before the Genome Project
or any of these things happened,
to look at DNA in the cells of our bodies
and following the clues that were left in the ancient texts,
all I did was follow them step-by-step
and the clues said that within your body
is a language and here is the way that language works.
What we now know is that the DNA in our bodies,
the elements that we call DNA,
literally are linked to the letters of ancient alphabets
in very precise ways and when we make those translations,
when the chemicals become the letters,
lo and behold the letters start to spell words
and the words start to spell sentences
and the sentences have meaning.
It appears that the message in our cells
exists as many, many, layers.
What we've done is crack the code
for only the very first layer.
It took 12 years to do it.
It's a very brief message
and it literally translates, literally says
to us when we look at the DNA,
the upper most level of the DNA,
the four DNA bases, the building blocks of all life,
it literally says the words "God eternal within the body.
"God eternal within the body."
And the complexity of life from a single yeast cell
to the complexity of a human
and everything in between appears to be different
combinations of these elements.
So a scientist will say they're different combinations
of carbon, oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen,
and they're correct by virtue of our language today.
The Ancients didn't know about those words.
They looked at it differently and they said
"They're different combinations of the words
"God eternal within the body."
And they're correct as well.
Two different ways of describing our world.
Very different periods of time.
So for this one top layer discovery,
what is the implication at this point in history?
The implication for me searching for a principle
of peace, there are many implications.
I've had people ask me "Well why don't you
"take on the evolutionary biologist?
"Why don't you take on the theologians?"
And we could with this kind of information
but that wasn't the purpose for me.
I'll let other people take those things to task.
My purpose was to find a single principle of peace.
What this message says to us, three things.
It says beyond a shadow of a doubt,
we're here on purpose, it's an intentional code.
We don't know who put it there, God eternal within the body.
We don't know who God is or what God is.
It's interesting however that the word God in our bodies
matches the word that we find in 2,200-year old text.
Like the Dead Sea Scrolls, it's the same name.
It tells us we're here on purpose.
It tells us that we're part of one another
in all life that shares that message.
So any form of life where the code can be translated,
God eternal within the body, it says they're part of us
and we're part of them.
And because this code exists even in ancient forms of life
where we've been able to glean DNA,
in single-celled organisms for example,
it says whoever put that code there
existed before those primitive organisms.
So it suggests that we are part of perhaps
something much greater than we've ever imagined.
Now you can read a lot into that.
Scientifically we can't say what that something is.
All we can say is there's a code there,
it's intentional, it links all life.
For me, what it says to us as I travel the world
and I meet these people,
people are ready for peace.
They need a reason to look at one another differently
and so many parts of the world, the hatred is so strong
because of what has happened between peoples.
They need a reason to see themselves differently
and if we were ever going to find a reason,
I think the name of God, the same name within the cells
of all humans, it gives us a place to begin.
It gives us a common plateau, a denominator.
It says at this very level what we can say is
we're not so different.
It says that.
It says that for us at the very least.
Someone asked me, I was doing an interview,
a radio interview a few weeks ago and they said
"Well do you think this is going to change the world?"
And I said "Realistically it's not
"going to change the world.
"It's a place to begin, it gives us a reason."
I think it's something, I've got to tell you as a scientist,
the idea of looking at DNA as a language
is a bizarre, a bizarre concept.
A language that we can actually read, this alphabet,
it's been called the language of life since the 1950s
as a metaphor without perhaps knowing how close
that metaphor really is to what has happened.
Did I understand or misunderstand you
when you were saying that that is not true just in
the Ancient Hebrew but also in other ancient languages?
Well, it is true in other languages.
In the year 2000, there was a census
that was done on the Earth.
It's believed to be the most accurate census ever done.
It told us some very interesting things.
First of all it said there was about 6.2 billion of us
on this planet right now.
That number is so big I don't even know what it looks like.
But it said of that 6.2 billion people,
over 95% of the people of the Earth believe in the existence
of a higher power
and of that 95%, over one-half call that power God.
So if we were ever going to find a single principle
of peace that touches the most people in the deepest way.
If we could find a principle that is tied
to the already existing spiritual traditions,
I think that's a good place to begin.
So what we know now, half of the 95% believe
and actually call the power God.
The Ancient Hebrew language is the language
that holds the oldest records for the spiritual traditions
of over half of the world's population.
One billion Islamic and two billion Judeo-Christian,
three billion people are linked to the Old Testament,
the Book of Genesis, and the Torah,
and what subsequently became the Quran,
all linked through the prophet Abraham.
The oldest records of Abraham are in the Hebrew language.
So it made sense to me to use Hebrew first,
to translate life in our bodies into an ancient language.
It's called a root or a mother or a core language.
Once it was done, and Hebrew, biblical Hebrew
lends itself to this kind of work,
one it was done in that language,
I then began to look at other languages.
We know for certain it works in Ancient Arabic as well.
It may, looks like it works in Sanskrit,
although it's not, that work is not complete
so I cannot say definitively, and if it does,
what that means is in addition to the Hebrew,
it's the basis for over half the world's population
if it's in Sanskrit, it's the basis for Hindu
and for many of the Buddhist's traditions.
We've reached a lot of people in a language
that makes sense to them with a very empowering message.
I'm an optimist and as I've had the opportunity
to travel the Earth and meet with people,
I have a great faith in our species, in our destiny.
I think it's a tribute to our species
that we have each carried a message
from the first day of our existence,
perfectly replicated in every cell of our bodies,
and it gives us a reason to become better people
and to create a better world.
I love this world and I love the people of this world.
I appreciate you and your vision and your dedication
for helping us to take this message to a broader audience.
So thank you very much.
(gentle music)
To learn more about this subject,
you might want to pick up a copy of The God Code.
Meanwhile another sage we find to be equally inspirational
is eco-philosopher extraordinaire, Peter Russell.
Until next time, thanks for watching.
(gentle music)